March 27, 2023
Students who played sports before the pandemic did better during lockdowns
Participating in campus recreational sports can offset stress and contribute to academic competence
Media Relations
A history of participating in campus recreational sports can offset stress and contribute to academic competence even during high-stress periods such as a pandemic lockdown, shows a new study.
At the beginning of winter 2020, stress levels for students were generally low. Managing academic demands, building new relationships and trying to achieve personal goals were the top three stressors at that time.
“Students had just come back from the holiday break, their academic workload was still low, and they were not anticipating any societal disruption such as COVID-19,” said co-author Narges Abdeahad, a former PhD candidate in the department of Recreation and Leisure Studies.
By April 2020, after lockdowns had begun, the overall level of stress had increased to above the midpoint, and the top stressors had changed to online delivery of quizzes and exams, the influence of the pandemic on their lives and managing academic demands.
“We also found that graduate students and, even more so, international students had very low participation in campus recreational sports pre-pandemic, which has wellness implications for these two groups of students,” said Abdeahad.
The study, “
”, was co-authored by Abdeahad and Mock and published in the Journal of Leisure Research.


March 29, 2023
AI shows the need for healthier diets in long-term care homes
Waterloo researchers develop new AI technology to examine data on food and fluids consumed in LTC homes
Media Relations
A detailed analysis of consumed food showed there is a need to improve diets in long-term care (LTC) homes to make them healthier for residents.
The analysis found that eating more whole grains, plant-based proteins, and plain fruits and vegetables would help residents meet government guidelines and reduce their risk of inflammation.
Researchers at the University of Waterloo developed new artificial intelligence (AI) technology to examine data on food and fluids consumed by more than 600 residents over three days at 32 LTC homes.
Results were compared to recommendations in the 2019 Canada’s Food Guide on healthy eating and expert information on foods that could cause inflammation, contributing to chronic diseases including diabetes, cardiovascular disease, arthritis and dementia.


April 5, 2023
Math can help people identify the bonds of friendship
Research is the first to test how people predict social connections using only statistical information
Media Relations
New research reveals that math can help people identify the bonds of friendship.
The work from the University of Waterloo found that people use statistical information to determine bonds between people. It found that children as young as five can enter a room and use statistics on social cues to determine whether two people are friends.
“The ability to discern whether other people are likely to be affiliated is crucial in everyday life,” said Ori Friedman, co-author and professor of developmental psychology at the University of Waterloo. “When an adult joins a new workplace, or a child joins a new classroom, these judgments help them assess whether people are friends.”
Across five studies, the researchers surveyed 528 adults and 135 children to examine their use of statistical information when assuming people have a social relationship. In the studies, researchers presented participants with diagrams of social networks that showed lines drawn between two main characters and other people in the group. Participants were told that these lines indicated friendship, and importantly, researchers did not show a line connecting the two main characters. Researchers then asked participants how likely it was that the two main characters were friends.
“Past research has shown that children and adults infer social connections when people have similarities with each other, but our research is the first to test how people predict social connections using only statistical information,” said Claudia Sehl, lead author and PhD candidate in the Department of Psychology at Waterloo.
The researchers found that both children and adults thought the two main characters were friends when they had a lot of overlap in their social connections in common. This pattern was found in children as young as five years old, suggesting that the ability to consider social connections emerges early in development.
“We were surprised to see that children were able to infer social connectedness at such a young age,” said Sehl. “We did not tell children to count or think about the number of mutual connections, yet children were able to use complex statistical information to learn about relationships spontaneously.”
Sehl adds that participants were also able to conclude the strength of social connections from the size of the network. For example, when a character had many mutual connections with someone with a smaller network, participants saw this as more meaningful than having many mutual connections with someone with a larger social network.
The researchers plan to build on these findings and explore whether these inferences also generalize to other non-social networks.
The paper, 
, authored by Friedman, Sehl and Waterloo professor Stephanie Denison, appears in the Journal of Experimental Psychology.


March 24, 2023
Q and A with the experts: The banking crisis and Canada 
Canadians should consider dividing their money between banks if needed
Media Relations
The recent collapse of banks in the United States and this week's intervention by the Swiss government to facilitate the takeover of banking giant Credit Suisse might have some worried about a repeat of the 2008 financial crisis.
, associate professor in the School of Accounting and Finance and co-director of the University of Waterloo's Computing and Financial Management program, sheds light on what's causing the instability in the banking system and how it might affect Canadian financial institutions.

	 
The bank collapses started with Silicon Valley Bank, which specializes in banking for technology companies. With the recent contraction in the tech sector, other forms of financing, such as venture capital, started to dry up, forcing firms to rely more on their bank deposits for day-to-day operations. Once too many depositors withdraw funds, a bank run becomes sell-fulfilling: by moving your money away from the bank, it becomes more unstable, and in turn, more people become worried and withdraw their money.
Sadly, these types of panics can spread, with Credit Suisse being the most important casualty. Whereas most large banks are healthy enough to absorb outflows, Credit Suisse was not in such a position.

	 
Although more banks may fail, today's conditions are different from the 2008 financial crisis. The collateral held by many of the banks that found themselves in crisis during that episode was opaque and tied to the US housing market. Now, much more collateral is in government debt, which is safer and much easier to value.

	 
Canada has a very different banking system than the US. The US has many small regional banks, while a handful of large banks dominate Canada. In Canada's favour, larger banks tend to be where those who are scared move their money 
 not from. In addition, many large banks are viewed as too big to fail. 
Although small, it is important to note that the instability probability is not zero. Therefore, Canadians should consider the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation deposit protection limit and split their money between banks if needed.
This series is produced for the media, and its purpose is to share the expertise of UWaterloo researchers. If you’d like to contact this researcher, please reach out to 
.


Hemophilia
4